README.md, before:

# Polykeys

> **Status:** Alpha v1.0.0-alpha.2 - Fully functional on Windows, Linux support in progress

Switch your keyboard layout automatically based on which keyboard you plug in.

## What is this?

You have multiple keyboards (Corne, Lily58, laptop keyboard...) and each one uses a different layout? Polykeys detects which keyboard you just connected and switches to the right layout automatically.

**Current features:**
- Automatic layout switching on device connection/disconnection
- Interactive device detection with `polykeys add --detect`
- System default fallback when no device is connected
- Real-time device monitoring
- Lua-based configuration

## Installation

### From source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/0xJohnnyboy/polykeys.git
cd polykeys

# Build for your platform
make build

# Or build for all platforms
make build-all

# Install to system
make install
```

### From Go
```bash
go install github.com/0xJohnnyboy/polykeys/cmd/polykeysd@latest
go install github.com/0xJohnnyboy/polykeys/cmd/polykeys@latest
```

## Configuration

Create a config file with device-to-layout mappings:

```lua
-- Format: { "alias", "deviceID", "layout" }
mappings = {
    { "Corne", "4653:0004", "US International" },
    { "Lily58", "1209:bb58", "US" },
    { "Logitech K380", "046d:c52b", "US" },

    -- Fallback when no device matches
    { "System Default", "system_default", "French AZERTY" },
}
```

**Device ID format:** `VID:PID` (Vendor ID:Product ID in hex, lowercase)
**Tip:** Use `polykeys add --detect` to automatically detect and add keyboards

### Config file locations

**Linux/macOS:**
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/polykeys/polykeys.lua` (preferred)
- `~/.config/polykeys/polykeys.lua`
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/polykeys.lua`
- `~/polykeys/polykeys.lua`
- `~/polykeys.lua`

**Windows:**
- `%APPDATA%\polykeys\polykeys.lua` (preferred)
- `%USERPROFILE%\.config\polykeys\polykeys.lua`
- `%LOCALAPPDATA%\polykeys\polykeys.lua`
- `%USERPROFILE%\polykeys\polykeys.lua`
- `%USERPROFILE%\polykeys.lua`

## Usage

Start the daemon:
```bash
polykeysd
```

Add a new keyboard (interactive):
```bash
polykeys add --detect
# Then plug in your keyboard
```

See what's happening (useful for debugging):
```bash
polykeys logs -f
```

List your mappings:
```bash
polykeys list
```

## Supported platforms

- ✅ **Windows** - Fully functional (alpha)
- ✅ **macOS** - Implemented (requires testing)
- 🚧 **Linux** - In progress

### Platform implementation details

**Windows:**
- Device detection via WMI queries
- Layout switching using Windows Keyboard Layout API
- Polling-based detection (every 2 seconds)
- Automatic switch to default layout on device disconnection

**macOS:**
- Device detection via `system_profiler` USB enumeration
- Layout switching using Carbon Text Input Sources API (CGO)
- Polling-based detection (every 2 seconds)
- Requires native compilation on macOS with CGO enabled
- Supports standard macOS keyboard layouts and input methods

## Important notes

### WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

Polykeys **does not work on WSL** due to limitations in device access:
- WSL does not expose `/dev/input` for USB device monitoring
- USB events are not propagated to the WSL environment
- Layout switching commands may not affect the Windows host

**Workarounds:**
- Run polykeys natively on Windows (use the Windows build)
- Use a native Linux installation (dual boot or VM)
- Use WSL2 with usbipd (complex setup, not recommended)

### Permissions

On Linux, you may need appropriate permissions to access `/dev/input`. If the daemon fails to start, try:
- Adding your user to the `input` group: `sudo usermod -a -G input $USER`
- Running the daemon with `sudo` (not recommended for production)

## Building

```bash
# Build for current platform
make build

# Build for all platforms
make build-all

# Build for specific platform
make build-linux
make build-windows
make build-darwin

# Run tests
make test

# Show all available targets
make help
```

## Troubleshooting

Having issues? Check the [troubleshooting guide](TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common error codes and solutions.

All errors include a code (e.g., `PK_100`) to help identify and resolve issues quickly.

## License

AGPL-3.0

Commit message:

feat(windows): preserve system language when switching layouts
Windows now correctly preserves the system language (e.g., French)
when switching keyboard layouts (e.g., to US International). This is
achieved by enumerating installed layouts and matching both the device
ID and current language ID.

Changes:
- Implement loadKeyboardLayoutPreservingLanguage() with KLID verification
- Use GetKeyboardLayoutList() to find exact layout variant match
- Verify actual KLID to distinguish between layout variants
- Remove unused loadKeyboardLayout() function
- Add KL_NAMELENGTH constant for cleaner code
- Add debug logging under --debug flag

Docs:
- Add warning about needing to install layouts on system first
- Update Windows platform details to mention language preservation
- Add --debug flag usage example

README.md, after:

# Polykeys

> **Status:** Alpha v1.0.0-alpha.2 - Fully functional on Windows, Linux support in progress

Switch your keyboard layout automatically based on which keyboard you plug in.

## What is this?

You have multiple keyboards (Corne, Lily58, laptop keyboard...) and each one uses a different layout? Polykeys detects which keyboard you just connected and switches to the right layout automatically.

**Current features:**
- Automatic layout switching on device connection/disconnection
- Interactive device detection with `polykeys add --detect`
- System default fallback when no device is connected
- Real-time device monitoring
- Lua-based configuration

## Installation

### From source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/0xJohnnyboy/polykeys.git
cd polykeys

# Build for your platform
make build

# Or build for all platforms
make build-all

# Install to system
make install
```

### From Go
```bash
go install github.com/0xJohnnyboy/polykeys/cmd/polykeysd@latest
go install github.com/0xJohnnyboy/polykeys/cmd/polykeys@latest
```

## Configuration

Create a config file with device-to-layout mappings:

```lua
-- Format: { "alias", "deviceID", "layout" }
mappings = {
    { "Corne", "4653:0004", "US International" },
    { "Lily58", "1209:bb58", "US" },
    { "Logitech K380", "046d:c52b", "US" },

    -- Fallback when no device matches
    { "System Default", "system_default", "French AZERTY" },
}
```

**Device ID format:** `VID:PID` (Vendor ID:Product ID in hex, lowercase)
**Tip:** Use `polykeys add --detect` to automatically detect and add keyboards

> ⚠️ **Important:** Keyboard layouts must be installed on your system before Polykeys can switch to them. On Windows, go to Settings → Time & Language → Language & Region → Add a keyboard. On macOS, go to System Settings → Keyboard → Input Sources. On Linux, layouts are typically pre-installed.

### Config file locations

**Linux/macOS:**
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/polykeys/polykeys.lua` (preferred)
- `~/.config/polykeys/polykeys.lua`
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/polykeys.lua`
- `~/polykeys/polykeys.lua`
- `~/polykeys.lua`

**Windows:**
- `%APPDATA%\polykeys\polykeys.lua` (preferred)
- `%USERPROFILE%\.config\polykeys\polykeys.lua`
- `%LOCALAPPDATA%\polykeys\polykeys.lua`
- `%USERPROFILE%\polykeys\polykeys.lua`
- `%USERPROFILE%\polykeys.lua`

## Usage

Start the daemon:
```bash
polykeysd
# use the --debug flag for more verbose output
```

Add a new keyboard (interactive):
```bash
polykeys add --detect
# Then plug in your keyboard
```

See what's happening (useful for debugging):
```bash
polykeys logs -f
```

List your mappings:
```bash
polykeys list
```

## Supported platforms

- ✅ **Windows** 
- ✅ **macOS**
- 🚧 **Linux** - requires further testing

### Platform implementation details

**Windows:**
- Device detection via WMI queries
- Layout switching using Windows Keyboard Layout API, preserving language
- Polling-based detection (every 2 seconds)
- Automatic switch to default layout on device disconnection

**macOS:**
- Device detection via `system_profiler` USB enumeration
- Layout switching using Carbon Text Input Sources API (CGO)
- Polling-based detection (every 2 seconds)
- Requires native compilation on macOS with CGO enabled
- Supports standard macOS keyboard layouts and input methods

## Important notes

### WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux)

Polykeys **does not work on WSL** due to limitations in device access:
- WSL does not expose `/dev/input` for USB device monitoring
- USB events are not propagated to the WSL environment
- Layout switching commands may not affect the Windows host

**Workarounds:**
- Run polykeys natively on Windows (use the Windows build)
- Use a native Linux installation (dual boot or VM)
- Use WSL2 with usbipd (complex setup, not recommended)

### Permissions

On Linux, you may need appropriate permissions to access `/dev/input`. If the daemon fails to start, try:
- Adding your user to the `input` group: `sudo usermod -a -G input $USER`
- Running the daemon with `sudo` (not recommended for production)

## Building

```bash
# Build for current platform
make build

# Build for all platforms
make build-all

# Build for specific platform
make build-linux
make build-windows
make build-darwin

# Run tests
make test

# Show all available targets
make help
```

## Troubleshooting

Having issues? Check the [troubleshooting guide](TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common error codes and solutions.

All errors include a code (e.g., `PK_100`) to help identify and resolve issues quickly.

## License

AGPL-3.0
